<h1>Project: Data Lake</h1>

<h3>Introduction</h3>
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, i'm tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

I'll test my database database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to me by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with the expected results.

<h3>Project Description</h3>
In this project, i'll apply what i've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, i will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. I'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.


<h3>Song Dataset</h3>
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. 

<h3>Log Dataset</h3>
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.
The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. 

<h3>Schema for Song Play Analysis</h3>
Using the song and log datasets, we need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.
<h5>Fact Table</h5>
<ul>
  <li>songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong <br>
    (songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent)
    </li>
</ul>
 
<h5>Dimension Tables</h5>

<ul>
  <li>users - users in the app<br>
    (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level)
    </li>
  <li>songs - songs in music database <br>
    (song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration)
    </li>
  <li>artists - artists in music database <br>
    (artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude)
    </li>
  <li>time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units <br>
    (start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday)
    </li>
</ul> 


<h3>Project files</h3>
<ol>
  <li>etl.py reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3.</li>
     <li>dl.cfg contains your AWS credentials.</li>
    <li>README.md provides an introduction on the project.</li>
</ol> 

<h4>Build ETL Pipeline</h4>
<li>Load the AWS credentials</li>
<li>Load data (Song Data and Log Data) from S3</li>
<li>Create fact and dimension tables using Spark</li>
<li>Load fact and dimension tables to S3 using AWS </li>