<h1>Project: Data Modeling with Postgres</h1>

<h3>Introduction</h3>
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. My role as a data engineer is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 

<h3>Project Description</h3>
In this project, we apply data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. We will need to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

<h3>Song Dataset</h3>
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

<h3>Log Dataset</h3>
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.
The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. 


<h3>Schema for Song Play Analysis</h3>
Using the song and log datasets, we need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.
<h5>Fact Table</h5>
<ul>
  <li>songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong <br>
    (songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent)
    </li>
</ul>
 
<h5>Dimension Tables</h5>

<ul>
  <li>users - users in the app<br>
    (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level)
    </li>
  <li>songs - songs in music database <br>
    (song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration)
    </li>
  <li>artists - artists in music database <br>
    (artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude)
    </li>
  <li>time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units <br>
    (start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday)
    </li>
</ul> 


<h3>Project files</h3>
<ol>
  <li>test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table on the database</li>
  <li>create_tables.py drops and creates all tables.</li>
  <li>etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into the tables.</li>
  <li>etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into the tables.</li>
  <li>sql_queries.py contains all sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.</li>
    <li>README.md provides an introduction on the project.</li>
</ol> 

<h3>Project Steps</h3>
Below are steps that we follow to realize the project:
<ol>
  <li>Create Tables: <br>
    We use sql_queries.py and create_tables.py to create the database and tables</li>
  <li>Build ETL Processes: <br>
    We use etl.ipynb notebook to develop ETL processes for each table.</li>
  <li>Build ETL Pipeline: <br>
    We process the entire datasets on etl.py. 
    </li>
  <li>Run Sanity Tests: <br>
    We test our code on the test.ipynb notebook. 
    </li>
  <li>Document Process: <br>
    This is the readme file. It describe the project.
    </li>
</ol> 

